<TITLE SLIDE> Hi everyone and thank you for the opportunity to present some of my work. Presentations like this are always a great opportunity for graduate students. As David mentioned I will be taking you on a quick tour through a data set I have processed over the last year. It is part of a larger tomographic study of the Canadian Lithosphere. My side of the project was to churn through as much available seismic data as possible to provide estimates for the crustal thickness as well as crustal properties such as Poisson's Ratio. We are going to take a quick look at the data across Canada, look at comparisons with regional data sets for quality control and take note of any interesting features along the way.

[ Note describe the map ]
[ Read Eaton paper from 2006 Google Drive ]

<MAP ALL DATA> I will be presenting data Seismic data utilized in this study come from 343 stations across Canada from all available networks. Of course this is far from the USArray, which we will hear about later on. We have clustering of stations around areas of geological resource and research interest, high accessibility and of course, population centres aka universities. You can see that many regions are extremely sparsely represented, and that's just part of the fun. <MAP PROCESSED / NOT PROCESSED>Of these 343 stations 146 have data of reasonable quality and quantity to be useful for study. Many of the stations along the subduction zone on BC's coast were omitted as the environment is too complex for this type of study. Those 146 stations are shown here as the green triangles.

   <MAP ONLY PROCESSED> All stations are broadband with data selected between the years 2000 and 2012 using more than 700 earthquake sources. The data was processed using a receiver function method, which I will outline extremely briefly since it was discussed in detail at last year's conference. <MAP RECEIVER FUNCS> The basic idea is that one can utilize the fact that seismic waves are composed of separate components, the two of interest being the P-wave and the S-wave. We look at the direct energy arrival of an earthquake as well as the energy that has reflected off the surface then reflected again off the Moho before being registered at the seismic station. In a simple laterally homogeneous earth model we can predict the travel time difference between the P-wave component and the S-wave component with a function that depends on the P and S wave speeds in the crust as well as the crustal thickness. We can use this fact to find the right set of parameters so that the predicted travel times from the equations give us the best match to the data. We then use this optimum set of parameters as our best estimate for the seismic parameters Vp/Vs (which gives us Poisson's ratio) and crustal thickness for the profile below the seismic station. <MAP WITH CRUST 2.0 DATA> Other data used in this survey have come from the Crust 2.0 project, a global crustal model housed at the University of San Diego that incorporates newer data sources and offers higher resolution than models such as PREM. Crust 2.0 provides estimates of thickness, Vp and Vs for distinct layers in the crust which are averaged so they can be related to the data in this study. <MAP WITH MOONEY STARS> Also I have included many active source experiments compiled into a database I received through personal communication from Walter Mooney. These provide estimates for crustal thickness as well as compressional wave velocity Vp. These are shown on the map as the yellow stars.

  <MAP THOMPSON DATA> A study published in 2010 by Thompson, Snyder and Bastow et. al. looked at 34 stations in the Hudson Bay area, which you can see in red. This provides an great opportunity to compare some of the estimates with published material. <MAP COMPARISON THOMPSON H DATA> Comparing the crustal thickness estimates for the two data sets we see that there is a correlation between the two of 0.95. This provides strong confidence in the estimates, however the method is very sensitive to crustal thickness, so it is the low hanging fruit. <MAP COMPARISON THOMPSON H DATA> Now plotted is the Vp/Vs ratio for the two data sets. We see a correlation of 0.5, much less than the estimates for crustal thickness. However taking the two together gives me reasonable confidence in the computed estimates. What is evidently most worrying is the error estimates. These need to corrected so that they at least encompass the results from this published study. As of now the error has been calculated by taking random samples from the dataset and performing the calculations 1024 times for different samples. The standard deviation in the computed values is used as the standard error for the final estimates.

  <MAP H DATA> First lets take a quick look at crustal thickness, here you have estimates for crustal thickness at all the processed stations, blue being shallow starts at around 25km up to the red thicker units at 46km. You can see some zones of interest such as the fault that David discussed a few minutes ago. We can see the jump in crustal thickness over the fault as you go from the Slave to the Rae or Churchill Province. Also we can see a trend in South Ontario as we move north and up the St Lawrence Seaway. There appears to be secular variation in the North Eastern Churchill. As we move North and East we have thickening of continental crust.  <MAP H DATA CRUST 2.0 OVERLAY> Overlaying it with the Crust 2.0 data we see general agreement such as here in Southern Ontario as well as the Slave and mid Churchill Province. But Crust 2.0 misses the trend across the Slave -> Rae as well as this thinner crust "belt" running north and parallel to the St Lawrence. The secular trend in NE Churhill is also not represented in the Crust 2.0 data.

  <MAP R DATA> Now lets take a look at the Vp/Vs data. The colors are again, lower for blue, starting at 1.68 to higher values, reds, ending at 1.84. We see something that may be interesting in the North East of the Slave province, with a cluster of low Vp/Vs values. There also appears to be an shift throughout the Superior province from high Vp/Vs in the South to low Vp/Vs in the North East. <MAP R DATA CRUST 2.0 OVERLAY> Again we can overlay the best estimates for the rock types from Crust 2.0 and see where we move away from aggregate averages. ____ _____ _____


  Another way to look at the dataset is by geological region. We are going to look at the distribution of values within each region as histograms which gives us a characterization which may be of use for surveys such as Crust 2.0 and of course the tomographic study for which this analysis is part. I am going to focus on the Canadian Shield provinces as there is not enough data in the other geological regions for meaningful analysis of this type. Here we have the Churchill, Superior, Slave and Grenville Provinces Poisson Ratio data binned by frequency and we can see distinct characterizations. The Churchill province is characterized by a lower Poisson Ratio, for comparison this value is very close to that of a Granite Gneiss. The Superior appears to have a slightly higher aggregate Poisson Ratio, again for comparison, a value representative of a tonalite Gneiss. Finally, skipping the Slave, we see a much higher value for the Grenville Province - a value more representative of a mafic lower crust. Now the limitation on data is such that these histograms are poor representations of normal distributions, so I interpret these characterizations with some degree of scepticism. However, when we bin Walter Mooney's active source Vp estimates in the same way, which are sampled using completely different methods at different locations we see the same characteristic trend between the regions. This indicates that there is some validity to these averages.

  We can also arrange the data by geological age, collecting all the Archean and Proterozoic data into two histograms. Here we see Poisson's Ratio data from the data I have processed and we see that it is greater than Proterozoic stations have a higher value than that of the Archean ones. This is similar to other regions analyzed by researchers studying crustal formation and has been attributed to basaltic underplating of the Proterozoic crust during early tectonic processes. The Vp data tells us the same story.


  Finally, looking at the dataset as a whole, and comparing the regional and Canadian Shield averages to those of global averages it seems to me that the values are lower than expected. This is not just a peculiarity of this dataset I have processed. While the averages of the Thompson, Snyder et al are extremely close to the averages of this data set, they are actually slightly more felsic. This leads me to conclude that for one reason or another the Canadian Shield appears to have a lower Poisson ratio than would be expected from global norms.

  Okay, thanks for listening, I believe we have a little time if any one has questions.
