<1. TITLE SLIDE> Hello everyone and thank you for providing me with the opportunity to present some of my work. I will be taking you on a quick tour through a data set I have developed over the last year with assistance from my supervisor Michael Bostock and collaboration with Nikolas Christensen and David Snyder. It will be presented as twenty maps in twenty slides, maps being the tower of babel for geologists, geochemists and geophysicists. This work is part of a larger tomographic study of the Canadian Lithosphere. My side of the project was to churn through as much available seismic data as possible to provide estimates for the crustal thickness as well as crustal properties such as the seismic P and S wave velocity ratio. We are going to take a quick look at the data across Canada, look at comparisons with regional data sets and take note of any interesting features along the way. I hope to make the case that the data is reasonable and hopefully provoke some thinking about the questions it raises.

<2. MAP ALL DATA> [Discuss the map] The seismic data utilized in this study come from 343 stations across Canada from all available networks. Of course this is far from the USArray. We have clustering of stations around areas of geological resource and research interest, transportation corridors and of course, population centres, aka universities. You can see that many regions are extremely sparsely represented, but that's just part of the fun of working in Canada.

<3. MAP PROCESSED / NOT PROCESSED>Of these 343 stations 146 have data of reasonable quality and quantity to be useful for todays presentation. Many of the stations along the subduction zone on BC's coast were omitted as the environment is too complex for this type of study.

   <4. MAP ONLY PROCESSED> All stations are broadband with data selected between the years 2000 and 2012 using more than 700 earthquake sources. The data is processed using a receiver function method, which I will outline extremely briefly since it was discussed in detail at last year's conference.

<5. MAP RECEIVER FUNCS> The basic idea is that one can utilize the fact that seismic waves are composed of separate components, the two of interest being the P-wave and the S-wave. We look at the direct energy arrival of an earthquake as well as the energy that has reflected off the surface then reflected again off the Moho before being registered at the seismic station. In a simple laterally homogeneous earth model we can predict the travel time difference between the P-wave component and the S-wave component with a travel time function that depends on the P and S wave velocities in the crust as well as the crustal thickness. We can use this fact to find the right set of parameters so that the predicted travel times from the equations give us the best match to the data. We then use this optimum set of parameters as our best estimate for the bulk seismic properties and crustal thickness for the profile below the seismic station.

<6. MAP WITH CRUST 2.0 DATA> Other data used in this survey have come from the Crust 2.0 project, a global crustal model housed at the University of San Diego that incorporates newer data sources and offers higher resolution than models such as PREM. Crust 2.0 provides estimates of thickness, Vp and Vs.

<7. MAP WITH MOONEY STARS> Also I have included many GSC documented active source experiments which were compiled into a database by Walter Mooney. These provide estimates for crustal thickness as well as compressional wave velocity Vp.

  <8. MAP THOMPSON DATA> A study published in 2010 by Thompson, our own David Snyder and Ian Bastow and others looked at 34 stations in the Hudson Bay area, which you can see in red. This provides a great opportunity to compare some of the estimates with published material.

<9. MAP COMPARISON THOMPSON H DATA> Comparing the crustal thickness estimates for the two data sets we see that there is a correlation between the two of 0.95. This provides strong confidence in the estimates, however the analysis is very sensitive to crustal thickness, and generally is associated with less error, so it is the low hanging fruit.

<10. MAP COMPARISON THOMPSON R DATA> Now plotted is the Vp/Vs ratio for the two data sets. We see a correlation of 0.5, much less than the estimates for crustal thickness. Estimates for Vp/Vs have higher inherent error so the lower correlation is not surprising. However taking the two together gives me reasonable confidence in the computed estimates. Most problematic are the error estimates. These need to corrected so that they at least encompass the results of the published data. As of now the error has been calculated by taking random samples from the dataset and performing the calculations 1024 times for different samples. The standard deviation in the computed values is used as the standard error for the final estimates.

  <11. MAP H DATA> Lets look at some of the data. Here we have estimates for crustal thickness mapped onto the station locations. Blue represents thinner crusts and starts at around 25km and the red colors represent thicker units ending at 46km. You can see some zones of interest such as the fault that David discussed a few minutes ago. We can see a jump in crustal thickness over the fault as you go from the Slave to the Rae or Churchill Province. Also we can see a trend in Southern Ontario as we move north and up the St Lawrence Seaway. There appears to be secular variation in the North Eastern Churchill. As we move North and East we have thickening of continental crust.

 <12. MAP H DATA CRUST 2.0 OVERLAY> Overlaying the map with the Crust 2.0 data, with the same value and color scheme, we see general agreement such as here in Southern Ontario as well as the Slave and mid Churchill Province. But Crust 2.0 misses the trend across the Slave -> Rae as well as this thinner crust "belt" running north and parallel to the St Lawrence. The secular trend in NE Churhill is also not represented in the Crust 2.0 data.

  <13. MAP R DATA> Now lets take a look at the Vp/Vs data. The colors are again, low for blue, starting at 1.68 to higher values, reds, ending at 1.84. For perspective, the value for Quartzite is 1.65 and Basalt is 1.85. We see some interesting features in the North East of the Slave province, with a cluster of low Vp/Vs values in a semi circle of high values. There also appears to be an shift throughout the Superior province from high Vp/Vs in the South to low Vp/Vs in the North East.

<14. MAP R DATA CRUST 2.0 OVERLAY> Again we can overlay the best estimates for the rock types from Crust 2.0. The computed Vp/Vs values are noticably lower than the estimates given by Crust 2.0. This is something we will see again shortly.

  <15. MAP GEOPROVS ALL>  Another way to look at the dataset is by geological region. We are going to look at the distribution of values within three regions as histograms which gives us a characterization which may be of use for surveys such as Crust 2.0 and of course the tomographic study which this analysis is part of. I am going to focus on the Canadian Shield provinces as there is sufficient data and a fair amount of previous research in these regions.

<16. MAP HISTOGRAMS CHURCHILL> [Explain the histograms + explain the averaging] The Churchill Province shows a peak at 1.735. For comparison this value is representative of a granite gneiss. A value of 1.735 seems to be low compared to global estimates for cratonic regions. Yet this value matches almost exactly with the average value taken from the Thompson paper, so the results are consistent with previous work in this region.

<17. MAP HISTOGRAMS SUPERIOR>  The Superior Province is characterized by a slightly higher value of Vp/Vs, a value closer to that of a tonalite or biotite gneiss.

<18. MAP HISTOGRAMS GRENVILLE> Finally the Grenville Provinces Vp/Vs Ratio is much higher, more representative of a mafic Gneiss, or a mafic lower crust. Because some of these distributions have few data I would be skeptical of these characterizations. But if I replay those slides, we can see the same pattern emerge from the active source data. We see the estimates for Vp also increase as we move South through the Canadian Shield.

  <19. MAP HISTOGRAMS ARCHEAN VS PROTOERZOIC> We can also arrange the data by geological age, collecting all the Archean and Proterozoic data into two histograms. Here we see Vp/Vs data from the Proterozoic stations have a higher statistical value than that of the Archean ones. We also see this in the active source Vp data. This is similar to other regions across the world that have analyzed by researchers studying early crustal formation and has been attributed to basaltic underplating of the Proterozoic crust during early tectonic processes.

  <20. CONCLUSION SLIDE> I believe that the data is reasonably consistent with publishlished literature. I think more work needs to done on the error calculations and that will be something I will be working on right away. We can see various expected trends in the data, such as the Archean vs Proterozoic and general alignment with global crustal models. More interestingly we see various local deviations from the expected average, with some key zones of interest in the Slave, NE Churchill and the Superior which warrant further attention. A final conclusion is that the Canadian Shield has lower Vp/Vs values than previous research into bulk averages would suggest. Studies by Zandt and Ammon, Durrheim and Mooney and Nik Christensen all suggest higher values for Shield like regions. This is something that I am interested in investigating further and I would value your ideas and interpretations.

  Okay, thanks for listening, I believe we have a little time if anyone has questions.
